---
layout: single
permalink: courses/2800/23/
classes: wide
sidebar:
  nav: "courses"
title: CS2800 Design and Analysis of Algorithms
---

## Jan - May 2023

#### <i class="fas fa-map-marker-alt" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Coordinates
- Where: CS15
- When: B slot - Mon (9-9.50), Tue (8-8.50), Wed (13-13.50), Fri (11-11.50)

#### <i class="fas fa-users" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> TAs
TBA


#### <i class="fas fa-bullseye" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Objectives
This course serves as an introduction to the study of design and analysis of algorithms. The aim of the course is to enable the students to abstract out the core algorithmic questions in arising in various real-life computational problems, and to make a systematic approach to solve them. The course aims to develop the basic tools and techniques essential to develop efficient, provably correct algorithms. The course will require a fair amount of problem-solving and the lectures will be supplemented by problem sets and tutorials.

The course serves as a recommended prerequisite to almost all the advanced courses in theoretical computer science, especially to courses on advanced algorithm design and complexity theory. This course will assume a background of basic algorithms, basic data structures and asymptotic analysis (the topics that have been covered in CS2700/CS2705).

#### <i class="far fa-list-alt" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Contents
The methods that we will see in the course are not domain-specific, but are rather very generic. While it is unlikely that any one of these approaches can be directly applied, it provides a framework from within which the new algorithms can be thought about and developed. The course will include the basic design paradigms like divide and conquer, greedy algorithms, dynamic programming with appropriate motivating problems. If time permits, we will also look at some advanced techniques and take a brief glimpse at a theory of intractability. The lecture schedule will give a more detailed description of the contents of the course.


#### <i class="fas fa-book" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> References
 - **[E]** - Algorithms by Jeff Erickson
 - **[KT]** - Algorithm Design by Kleinberg and Tardos
 - **[CLRS]** - Introduction to Algorithms by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein
 - **[DPV]** - Algorithms by Dasgupta, Papadimitrou and Vazirani
 There are lots of lecture notes and resources available online that we will refer to occasionally.

#### <i class="fas fa-percentage" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Grading policy (tentative)
- Mini-quizzes: 20% (best (n-1)/n)
- Quizzes: 2*20 = 40%
- End-sem: 40%

#### <i class="far fa-calendar-alt" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Important dates (tentative)
TBA

#### <i class="fas fa-folder-open" style="color:DodgerBlue"></i> Course Materials
TBA
