---
layout: single
permalink: courses/6014/20/lec
sidebar:
  nav: "courses"
classes: wide
title: CS6840 Modern Complexity Theory
---

## Sep - Dec 2020

{::options parse_block_html="true" /}
<div class="notice--info">
The lecture videos and the notes written during the lectures are available below.
- [Lectures](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1M-FkUIsU1zv2Ukeq5Qt3R3oC6vikiMuH?usp=sharing)
- [Slides](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/13AJ0EgEuKOKNLeOXolwqMKZW7nTRfXLi?usp=sharing) and [Scribbles](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1JwN_hbGq_jlJtEv4f3o5eA2pPXwP7YlE?usp=sharing)
</div>
{::options parse_block_html="false" /}

Week 1
: Administrative details about the course; Introduction to the course; Historical perspective; Turing machines; Configuration and acceptance condition; Examples; Definition of recursive languages and recursive enumerability; Equivalent models; Tape-reduction theorem.
- References: [K1] - Chapters 28, 29, 30

---

Week 2
: Enumerator machines; Turing machine encodings; Diagonalization - Existence of languages that are not recursively enumerable; Universal Turing machines; The universal language and the membership problem; Undecidability of the membership problem; Halting problem is undecidable; Examples of languages that are not recursively enumerable; Comparing the halting problem and the membership problem.
- References: [K1] - Chapters 28, 29, 30, 31

---

Week 3
: Undecidability; Reducibilities - Turing reductions and many-one reductions; Properties of many-one reductions; examples; examples of languages that are not r.e; Rice's theorem - examples and non-examples, proof; Rice-McNaughton-Myhill-Shapiro theorem about non-monotone properties of r.e lannguages and proof.
- References: [K1] - Chapters 31, 32, 33, 34

---

Week 4
: First-order theory of numbers, example sentences, Peano's axiomatization, notion of a proof, statement of Gödel's incompleteness theorem. Proof of incompleteness theorem - the set of theorems in Peano's axiomatization is recursively enumerable whereas the set of true statements in first-order number theory is not.
- References: [K1] - Chapters 38,39

---

Week 5
: Oracle Turing Machines; Halting problem of TMs with oracle access to the Halting problem; Arithmetic Hierarchy - the first levels; Inclusions and separations; FIN is in $$\Sigma_2$$; $$\text{MP}^{\text{MP}}$$ is complete for $$\Sigma_2$$; Quantifier characterization of the arithmetic hierarchy.
- References: [K1] - Supplementary Lecture J, [K2] - Chapter 35

---

Week 6
: Proof of the quantifier characterization of the arithmetic hierarchy; placing FIN, REG, COF, TOTAL in the hierarchy using the characterization; FIN is $$\Sigma_2$$-complete using the characterization; Tarski's undefinability theorem; Productive sets - definition and properties; R.E-intermediate languages - Post's theorem; From productive sets to simple sets; Construction of a simple set.
- References: [K1] - Supplementary Lecture J, [K2] - Chapter 35, 37

---

Week 7
: Notion of a computational resource, deterministic time, multi-tape vs single-tape simulations, crossing sequences, quadratic lower bounds on single-tape machines.
- References: [K2] - Chapter 1

---

Week 8
: Linear speed-up theorem, Time hierarchy theorem, simulating multi-tape TMs using 2-tape TMs (Hennie-Stearns construction), translation and padding, time constructibility is necessary - Borodin-Trachtenbrot Gap theorem.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 3, [DK] - Chapter 1

---

Week 9
: Proof of the Gap theorem; Space complexity; Robust complexity classes - P,EXP,L,PSPACE; Tape compression, universal TM simulation and the space-hierarchy theorem; Savitch's theorem; Non-deterministic time and space - simulations and inclusions.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 3, [DK] - Chapter 1

---

Week 10
: Non-deterministic time-hierarchy theorem; certificates and efficient verification - witness characterization of $$\mathsf{NP}$$; $$\mathsf{NP}$$ and $$\mathsf{coNP}$$; the $$\mathsf{P}$$ vs $$\mathsf{NP}$$ problem; reductions and completeness - the canonical $$\mathsf{NP}$$-complete problem; examples of poly-time many-one reductions; parsimonious reductions.
- Reference: [AB] - Chapters 2,3; [DK] - Chapters 1,2

---

Week 11
: Cook-Levin theorem; decision and search - self-reducibility; PSPACE completeness -TQBF and winning strategies; logspace reductions - P-completeness and NL-completeness.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 4

Week 12
: NL-completeness - STCONN and 2SAT; Immerman-Szelepscenyi theorem; Relativization barrier - the Baker-Gill-Solovay theorem.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 4, [K2] - Chapter 4

---

Week 13
: Oracle Turing Machines and the Polynomial-time Hierarchy; non-uniform algorithms for SAT - the Karp-Lipton theorem; Probabilistic Complexity - Las Vegas and Monte-Carlo algorithms; the class $$\mathsf{BPP}$$.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 5

---

Week 14
: Probabilistic Complexity - Las Vegas and Monte-Carlo algorithms; $$\mathsf{BPP}$$ vs $$\mathsf{ZPP}$$; amplification of success probability of $$\mathsf{BPP}$$ algorithms - $$\mathsf{BPP} \subseteq \mathsf{P}/\mathsf{poly}$$; BPP and the polynomial hierarchy.
- References: [AB] - Chapter 7
